Manifesto
European Elections Manifesto 2004
COMMON PREAMBLE
As adopted at 15th EFGP Council, Luxembourg, 8th November 2003
EUROPE CAN DO BETTER - YOU DECIDE!
Greens make the difference in Europe. The outcome of the 2004 European elections, which will be held in an enlarged European Union of 25 countries, will determine our common future. Greens have been among the most convinced promoters of fair enlargement. The reunification of Europe after the fall of the Berlin Wall was and remains one of the main duties of the Union. Greens in Europe are already playing a crucial role in building a more tolerant, social, ecological and democratic Union.
A strong Green presence in the European Union is the best guarantee for a European commitment on better governance of globalisation. Economic and trade rules must be put at the service of environmental and social objectives. We Greens want the EU and all of Europe to make a difference for peace, solidarity, respect for diversity and equity in an increasingly fragile and divided world that needs concrete proposals for a sustainable and just future. Greens are working in favour of an independent and cohesive European foreign policy based on democratic and ecological values.
We want Europe to take up its environmental responsibilities and therefore to implement a radical shift in energy and transport policy. Nuclear energy must be phased out and replaced with cleaner and safer alternative energy. The future belongs to sun, wind, biomass, hydrological and other renewable sources.
The EU we want is open and tolerant with strong protection of both cultural and natural diversity. Our Europe is committed to high social and ecological standards on a regional, European and international scale that must take preference over purely commercial interests. In our Green Europe, the rule of law and the rights of local peoples and individuals shall prevail over military might and economic dominance. Greens are already making a difference, and with your support in the 2004 European Elections, our influence will be even more decisive in the future.
The new constitutional treaty must make the EU more accountable, transparent and democratic and bring it closer to its citizens. We are convinced that the Convention that produced the proposal for a new European Constitution went in the right direction. It wrote an historic document. The nightmare of Nice ? where behind-the-scenes horse-trading decided the content of the treaty ? has to be overcome. Our position is that the European Constitution should be ratified by referendum.
In order to advance the aim of greening Europe, we will not hesitate to use the possibilities offered by the clause in the constitution which obliges the Commission to propose a European law when one million citizens ask for it. Citizen empowerment and more participatory democracy for civil society and NGOs are among our priorities. We want a social Union built on the basic principles of equality and solidarity and a European Union that strives for sustainable ecological development for the whole continent.
In our Green Vision, the European Union must be synonymous with and emblematic of the concept of peace. The European Union must stand for peace and should be a prime actor in working for peace in the unstable international situation.
The Greens? objectives are:
1. SAFEGUARDING THE ENVIRONMENT
We Greens have are two priorities in this area. The first of our priorities is SAFE, HEALTHY AND TASTY FOOD for everyone. In order to achieve this we will continue to seek and support radical reform of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), with a strong reorientation towards organic farming, regional food products and rural development. This is also the way forward to safeguard the diverse landscapes of Europe and protect the biodiversity of its flora and fauna.
We must ensure that the consumer comes FIRST, and in order to ensure safe food for all, animal rights must be safeguarded. This includes their rearing as well as how they are transported. We must also ensure that the consumer receives adequate protection by mandating correct food product labelling which guarantees traceability of contents. Of course, Greens are always in favour of the precautionary principle, and therefore refuse genetically modified organisms in food. We want to rein in the power of the chemical industry and make them take responsibility for the safety of their products and processes.
The second Green priority is a SHIFT IN ENERGY POLICY. We will do everything possible to put an end to the anachronistic and nuclear-supportive Euratom-Treaty. We must work unceasingly to make our governments comply with the Kyoto Protocol as a first step to reduce CO2 emissions. The EU is a leader in the battle to combat climate change - mainly due to Green pressure. This position has to be enhanced. We ask for the implementation of the Kyoto Protocol through the establishment of a European Climate Stability Pact. The Union has to continue to face up to its Kyoto commitments while making all efforts to convince reluctant countries to sign up. Our transport system must be reformed to increase efficiency and reduce pollution. This is a pre-condition for climate stability and a necessity to prevent increasingly hot summers, extreme floods and their dramatic consequences.
We want a better quality of life for all. In order to encourage all this to happen, a shift in taxation is essential: tax on labour must be reduced and eco-taxes on pollution must be introduced.
2. GREENING THE SOCIAL DIMENSION
The major goals that we Greens will strive for are STRONG COMMUNITIES AND LIVABLE CITIES; with SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SECURITY for all European citizens and the deployment of European Union REGIONAL AND STRUCTURAL AID in order to give life to SOLIDARITY throughout all Europe. Tax dumping by Member States should be stopped. The Union's competition policies have to be adapted to include social and ecological parameters. One focus of Green Politics is on social inclusion and efficient basic public services for all. Green social and employment policies include active efforts to further the interests of women; gender mainstreaming is part of all our policies. It is of great importance to facilitate a good work and family life balance, particularly by providing affordable child care. Greens believe that people with disabilities have the right to live a normal life. Barriers to work and to facilities must be removed. We are in favour of inclusive health care, access to gas, water and electricity services; fair pensions for senior citizens; the right to good education; job security; sharing out of labour time - job sharing; safeguarding health and safety at work; decent minimum wages; insistence on fair labour conditions - not cheap labour; enhancing a solid welfare system and developing the Tradition of the Welfare State, which entails solidarity and a regulated market economy. We resist the neo-liberal tendency to leave everything to the market. We Greens will also work to ensure that Regional and Structural Funds are used to guarantee social inclusion.
3. DEVELOPING DEMOCRACY
Developing democracy demands strong CITIZEN EMPOWERMENT. This means that at the forefront of our Green Vision we must have the full protection of Citizen Rights, Human Rights, Women?s Rights and Minority Rights. Minorities should be integrated and their diversity and cultural rights must be respected. We Greens will work for more Participatory Democracy for Civil Society and NGOs. With respect to European justice and police cooperation: we Greens demand more civil right guarantees. We will take all possible initiatives to ensure that the Charter of Fundamental Rights is fully applied.
Enlargement countries have to respect fully the need to have stable political institutions that guarantee democracy, justice and human rights In our vision of a tolerant and open Europe there is no room for the intolerance of extreme right wing forces and undemocratic nationalistic or violent religious movements. All citizens - independent of gender, colour, disabilities, sexual orientation, religion, language, origin or culture ? must have equal civil and political rights. Non-EU citizens established legally in the Union should have the right to become European citizens after not more than five years. Long-standing immigrants without legal status must have the opportunity to regularise their situation.
The EU has an important role to play in combating cross-border crime. However, increasing justice and police cooperation should not be at the expense of civil rights. The introduction of the European arrest warrant has bypassed the safeguards built into extradition procedures. The Greens demand guarantees of fair trials. To sum up: for us Greens, DEMOCRATIZATION OF EUROPE means more solidarity amongst people; more transparency; more accountability and democratic control of the European Parliament. It means increased subsidiarity, with decentralized powers given to regions and cities; more participatory democracy - including through referenda. Finally, fair and equal access to and by the Media is an essential part of our democratic process.
4. STRENGTHENING THE PEACE POLICY
Greens believe that Europe should undertake conflict prevention, not launch pre-emptive strikes. The Greens in Europe are in favour of multilateralism and disarmament. We are opposed to weapons of mass destruction and want to free our continent from their menace. We work to prevent further production and proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Weapons exports should be submitted to a strong and binding scrutiny. The Greens want to stop trafficking in small arms as well as production and use of landmines. We strongly believe that Europe must always act in the spirit of peace. The Greens point out that the existence of neutral countries within the EU should be highly valued by the Union itself.
The Greens will help to build a Europe that has international solidarity and cooperation as its priorities. Therefore Greens are working in favour of an autonomous and cohesive European foreign policy that actively defends human rights and democratic, social and ecological values. We Greens will encourage the formation of a European Peace Corps that should be involved in conflict prevention. This means giving solid support to developing countries in order to achieve a better economic balance amongst the countries in the world.
The priorities which we Greens insist upon are that peace policy should be centred on mediation, diplomacy and early conflict resolution, cultural appreciation, fair trade and fair control of energy resources as well as post-conflict restoration.
Finally, as Greens we believe that the UN is the best institution to deal with global threats, whilst promoting a joint European Policy, we maintain that European international actions should be under the control of the United Nations.
5. PROMOTING GRASS ROOTS GLOBALIZATION
For us Greens, the EU must play an important role in reforming and regulating the presently unfair system of globalization. The EU has the weight in international bodies (World Bank, IMF, etc.) to bring about change. Europe must be at the forefront in the fight for shaping the reform of the current system.
A Tobin-type tax must be introduced. We Greens insist that ecological and social criteria must be taken into account in trade issues. We must therefore re-regulate the world economy in order to make it more sustainable - there must be more democratic control of the economy.
In matters pertaining to world trade, we Greens believe in corporate responsibility - with strong and binding rules for corporations. In transnational governance, Europe must have a strong role in North- South aid and development cooperation. The rules of free trade must take into account the necessity to protect the quality of food and the living conditions and income of small farmers.
We Greens believe that there should be more consideration of and participation by regional and local economies. We will also work to maintain cultural diversity, for instance, by allowing incentives to the public broadcasting, or the film industry.
6. GREEN ACHIEVEMENTS
Throughout the last 20 years the Greens in the European Parliament have helped to produce a significant political and cultural shift. Before the forthcoming European elections, the members of the European Federation of Green Parties have decided to build a European Green Party with strong common goals.
We want to green Europe; you have the power to decide!


...............................................

A Green contract for Europe: Proposals for the next Parliament

The Greens EFA
in the European Parliament

2004 ­ 2009


A GREEN CONTRACT FOR EUROPE 2004 ­ 2009
The European Union is an ongoing project and one that is under permanent construction. The next five years, with a Union of 25 Member States ­ probably growing to 27 or more ­ will be decisive in determining which direction the Union will take. The Greens in the European Parliament present 44 proposals on how we would like to shape the Europe of the future. We want Europe to become a real power for environmental protection, peace and social justice. A real power for fair globalisation, for culture and a real power in the fight for human rights. Our 44 proposals represent a contract with the European Citizens and they are the main priorities for the Greens in the next Parliament.


44 proposals for Europe
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27. 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34. 35. 36. 37. 38. 39. 40. 41. 42. 43. 44. Moving towards future constitutional reform ............................................................................ 3 Abolish Euratom by 2007 .......................................................................................................... 3 Promote fundamental rights in Europe ...................................................................................... 3 Promote gender equality ............................................................................................................ 3 Ensure adequate control of Europol and the intelligence services............................................. 3 Campaign on the risks of biometrics.......................................................................................... 4 Protect human health through better protection of the environment.......................................... 4 A climate stability pact for Europe: 30% fewer greenhouse gases by 2020.............................. 4 Introduce a kerosene tax in the EU by 2006 and promote it worldwide....................................4 Reduce heavy traffic by one third by 2010 ................................................................................ 5 Promote rail transport: 100% more goods transported by rail by 2010 ..................................... 5 Install 10 million solar roofs ...................................................................................................... 5 Better control of high-risk chemicals......................................................................................... 5 Particulate filters for new diesel cars by 2010 ........................................................................... 5 Setting up an independent bureau for the follow up to "Natura 2000"...................................... 6 A Green strategy on genetic modification ­ zone, map, label ................................................... 6 Promote organic farming............................................................................................................ 6 Improve the conditions for animal transport and reduce transport miles .................................. 6 Stop EU plundering of fish stocks in the third world ................................................................ 7 Promote social convergence and social security........................................................................ 7 Right to vocational training for the unemployed ....................................................................... 7 A European passport for third country nationals legally residing in the EU ............................. 7 Annual award for 'best sustainable urban development initiatives' ........................................... 7 Remaking the global trading system .......................................................................................... 7 Reform the international financial institutions...........................................................................8 Protect public services inside and outside the EU ..................................................................... 8 Reinforced development cooperation ........................................................................................ 8 Introduce a Tobin tax on financial transactions ......................................................................... 8 A European social capital fund for sustainable development projects ...................................... 9 Towards harmonised corporate taxation .................................................................................... 9 Promote free software in public administrations ....................................................................... 9 Culture is transversal ­ save cultural diversity .......................................................................... 9 500,000 Erasmus students in Europe every year ..................................................................... 10 European educational program on migration in primary schools ............................................ 10 Stimulate the European film industry ...................................................................................... 10 Enhance artists' rights ­ create a European cultural observatory............................................. 10 An observatory to promote media pluralism and freedom.......................................................10 A European sports fund for a real European sport policy........................................................ 11 Reinforcement of conflict prevention and the European civil peace corps ............................. 11 A binding code of conduct for arms sales of any kind by 2009............................................... 11 A unique seat for Europe in the UN Security Council............................................................. 11 A fully operational International Criminal Court before 2006 ................................................ 11 Ban the death penalty worldwide before 2010......................................................................... 11 Make the EU Institutions more transparent, accountable and Green.......................................11

2


1. Moving towards future constitutional reform

Europe needs a Constitution. If governments cannot find an agreement on the basis of the text approved by the Convention, the challenge of a democratic Europe and of enlargement could be lost. The Greens will continue to work actively for a high level agreement on the Constitution by re-launching the European Parliament's constitutional initiative seeking the involvement of national parliaments and civil society. But even if an agreement can be found and the text of the Convention adopted, we commit ourselves to launch a Parliamentary initiative to change Part III of the Constitution, which sets out the concrete policies of the EU, in order to put it in line with the principles and objectives that we managed to introduce in Part I, and with the Charter of Fundamental Rights. Equally, we will strive to create the conditions and the alliances necessary to change the Constitution's revision system to remove veto rights for single Member States and extend ratification powers to the Parliament. Finally, we are committed to the idea of a European referendum with a double majority, a majority of citizens, and a majority in three-quarters of Member States.
2. Abolish Euratom by 2007

The Euratom Treaty for the promotion of nuclear power is a constitutional, technological and environmental anachronism. Dating from 1957, this Treaty has never been really modified. Furthermore, and contrary to the European Coal and Steel Treaty that disappeared after 50 years of existence, the Euratom Treaty is potentially infinite in its perpetuation. We are calling for its suppression in 2007 ­ 50 years after it was signed into law. The funds freed up by this action should be dedicated to the promotion of renewable sources of energy including sun, water, wind and biomass.
3. Promote fundamental rights in Europe

The Greens will launch a campaign for the promotion of fundamental rights in the EU. They call for the Charter of Fundamental Rights to be binding for all people living in Europe. This campaign will also aim at promoting full respect for the anti-discrimination principle especially regarding religion, gender balance, sexual orientation, disabilities, so-called 'ethnic minorities,' indigenous people, political exiles and economic refugees.
4. Promote gender equality

We will support initiatives to fully apply women's rights acquis in the new Member States in the form of special programmes and projects that will have to include women of minorities like the Roma. In the coming years the directives covering women's right must be codified and updated. Some of them are more than 30 years old and they should be converted into a modern set of equality rules for which implementation can be easily controlled and create de facto equality for all. In the five years ahead we will work by all means possible to put an end to trafficking in human beings especially when international crime is involved. We want to put an end to the sexual exploitation of women and young girls. We will take up the challenge of looking over the borders of an enlarged Union and fight for a better treatment of women in our new neighbouring countries as well as in developing countries.
5. Ensure adequate control of Europol and the intelligence services

In order to safeguard freedom and fight international crime and terrorism we need a trustworthy European police body. In order to increase public confidence in such a body, we propose 3


parliamentary scrutiny and judicial control as a cornerstone for both efficiency and the respect of democratic guarantees.
6. Campaign on the risks of biometrics

The Greens are very critical about projects planning to integrate electronic chips with biometric data (starting with digital photography and fingerprints) in the visa and residence permits of third country nationals as well as in European citizens' passports. The development and spread of biometry gives no guarantees against the use of this information ­ particularly by third countries ­ during trips abroad. Even if at this stage only two types of biometric data will be stored, nothing is foreseen to prevent the further integration of more sensitive data. This is a serious problem that the Greens are committed to tackling.
7. Protect human health through better protection of the environment

Human health is directly affected by both outdoor and indoor environmental pollution. Major sources of pollution include tobacco smoke, chemicals in consumer products and in the environment, and waste incineration. Non-smokers should have the right to smoke-free workplaces. That is why we want European-wide legislation to protect people from second-hand smoke at the workplace. Consumers should not be exposed to very hazardous chemicals in the products they buy, the food they eat or the environment. That is why we will continue to fight for a revision of European chemicals legislation that puts the protection of human health and the environment at its heart. The generation of waste ­ and in particular hazardous waste ­ should be significantly reduced. Waste that cannot be avoided should be reused, recycled, or composted, instead of incinerated. That is why we are pushing for EU legislative action to reduce the generation of waste and for a directive on compostable waste.
8. A climate stability pact for Europe: 30% fewer greenhouse gases by 2020

The Greens want Europe to remain at the forefront of the fight against climate change. While working towards a carbon-free, nuclear-free economy, Europe needs to drastically reduce its burden on the atmosphere to halt dangerous climate change. We propose a climate stability pact aimed at achieving a 30% reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by 2020. To achieve this, the Greens will work during the next legislative period towards: · The inclusion of more greenhouse gases and the transport sector into the emissions trading scheme · A harmonised and auction-based allocation of emission allowances to installations for the period starting 2008 · Requiring fully equipped passenger cars sold in Europe to consume less than three litres of fuel per 100 km by 2010 · Achieving a 25% share of the energy market for renewables by 2020
9. Introduce a kerosene tax in the EU by 2006 and promote it worldwide

The external costs to the environment and society from air transport need to be reflected in prices, and therefore an EU kerosene tax needs to be introduced as soon as possible. One of the most scandalous distortions of competition in the transport sector is the exemption of kerosene (fuel for large aeroplanes) from energy taxation. This exemption privileges this particular un-sustainable mode of transport against all other forms which, to a large extent, have to internalise their costs 4


through taxes. The new European Directive on the taxation of energy products will, on the basis of bilateral agreements between Member States, allow for taxation on kerosene for intra-EU flights. We will continue to push for the swift introduction of such taxes and for negotiating, on a world level, a multilateral agreement on kerosene taxation.
10. Reduce heavy traffic by one third by 2010

The unacceptable increase of road freight transport causes a number of social and environmental external costs for our society. The Greens want to get the trucks off Europe's highways and reduce heavy traffic by a third by 2010. Instruments to achieve this goal are: better spacial and regional planning, restructuring of production systems, improving transport management and consumption patterns, internalisation of external costs (through the 'eurovignette' directive and 'heavy vehicle fee', for example), efficient application of social, environmental and safety legislation by consequent controlling and modal shift measures in favour of rail and sustainable waterways.
11. Promote rail transport: 100% more goods transported by rail by 2010

Incentives are needed if we are to move goods transports from the roads to the railways. The Greens propose to double the amount of goods transported by rail by 2010 by focussing on investments to upgrade the existing railway infrastructure, provide more support for European integration of rail freight systems (inter-operability measures), improving noise reduction of freight wagons and boosting combined transport in Europe.
12. Install 10 million solar roofs

Renewable energies (sun, water, wind, biomass), along with both energy efficiency and conservation measures are the only way in which we can develop a truly sustainable energy economy. Notably, electricity and heat production can directly come from the transformation of the energy contained in solar radiance. For the public as well as decision-makers, solar roofs are a strong and visual means of promoting renewable energies. The Greens will campaign for a scheme to promote the installation 10 million solar roofs in Europe.
13. Better control of high-risk chemicals

Current EU legislation on chemicals amounts to an uncontrolled, large-scale experiment on human health and the environment with millions of tonnes of chemicals. There are tens of thousands of different chemicals on the European market, many of which were not tested for their effects on human health and the environment. In the last ten years risk assessments have been fully concluded for only 17 substances and restrictions have been adopted for only four of those at present. We know very little about the properties of most chemicals and even less about their uses. Chemicals of very high concern continue to be used in consumer products and/or are released into the environment. The new chemicals legislation needs to put an end to this. Therefore, the Greens want to phase-out the use of chemicals of very high concern in consumer products as soon as safer alternatives are available by 2012 at the latest, and to phase-out the use chemicals of very high concern that lead to releases to the environment by 2020 at the latest.
14. Particulate filters for new diesel cars by 2010

With a rapidly growing number of diesel engines, the concentrations of the most hazardous fraction of particulate emissions are increasing in Europe. These small particles cause illnesses such as bronchitis, asthma, and cardio-vascular diseases. A World Health Organisation study on 5


three European countries with high shares of diesel engines attributed 3% of all deaths in these countries to particulate emissions from road traffic. A new standard for particulate emissions from passenger cars and light vehicles needs to be set by 2010 at the latest to one tenth of those prescribed for 2005, that is to 0,0025 g/km. The per capita yearly cost to society arising from adverse health effects is already higher than the cost of particulate filters for diesel engines.
15. Setting up an independent bureau for the follow up to "Natura 2000"

At the end of 2002, a Green/EFA Group conference held in the European Parliament found an overwhelming demand among all stakeholders in the Natura 2000 process for the establishment of a help desk service to aid the implementation of the network. We secured funds for this aim by getting a budget line for "awareness raising and other general actions based on the Community action programmes in the field of the environment". The process of implementing the Nature Directives has become significantly delayed primarily due to limitations within Member States, co-financing issues and a lack of stakeholder acceptance. It is widely felt that establishing a platform for the communication of best practice and advice would greatly improve the implementation process.
16. A Green strategy on genetic modification ­ zone, map, label

Creating GMO free zones ­ The Greens want to promote the creation of GM-free zones in the enlarged European Union. Regions like Piedmont or geographical entities such as the island of Ireland, for example, should be able to define themselves as coherent territories free of GMOs. Promoting a Green Map for Europe ­The Greens demand the publication of maps and posters with the geography of ecological decisions (local municipalities having declared their territory GM- or nuclear-free, GATS facilities). Labelling products stemming from animals fed with GM food and feed ­ The current labelling ­ or lack thereof ­ of products containing GMOs presents problems. That is why it is necessary to work towards assuring totally transparent information to consumers. The Greens want systematic labelling when GM products or a product derived from a GM-contaminated source enters the food chain. This is particularly important for products coming from animals fed with GM-feed.
17. Promote organic farming

In the framework of the upcoming debate on the European action plan on organic farming, we will urge the EU to further enhance sustainable farming practice and sustainable marketing infrastructure for organic products. We will work towards obtaining measures including: support for organic meals to be served in school canteens, educational measures and support for direct marketing of organic food as a rural development measure. The EU should make all efforts to continuously increase the share of organic products in the food market. In order to achieve this, it is useful to strengthen the conditions linked to public subsidies (cross-compliance) and to reduce the externalisation of indirect costs of industrial agriculture than to allocate additional farm subsidies to organic farmers.
18. Improve the conditions for animal transport and reduce transport miles

The Greens will campaign for a reduction of animal transport and for the support of local and mobile slaughterhouses, which bring slaughter facilities closer to the farm instead of transporting live animals for days to the cheapest slaughterhouse. 6


19. Stop EU plundering of fish stocks in the third world

Over half of the fish consumed in the EU comes from outside the Union, much of it as a result of fisheries agreements with developing countries in Africa. These agreements are often poorly managed and monitored, leading to over-fishing, illegal fishing and problems for the local fishing communities when fish stocks are depleted. The Greens are campaigning to make these agreements fairer and more transparent, so that they help local fishermen develop their own sustainable fisheries to feed local populations. The Greens will campaign to establish proper accountability for the money the Commission spends to support these agreements.
20. Promote social convergence and social security

Social convergence via 'streamlining' social policy and social inclusion will be a main target for the next legislature. The Green European social model calls for policies that respond to the Lisbon objective of balancing ecological and economic development and full employment with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion. The Greens will campaign for EU-wide common objectives and indicators in all social policy areas to address poverty and social exclusion.
21. Right to vocational training for the unemployed

Major objectives in the European employment guidelines for 2004 include: the reduction in numbers of early school leavers and the broadening of the supply of training to improve access to lifelong learning, especially for those most in need such as the low-skilled and older workers. The right to life-long vocational training for the unemployed will improve people's chances of finding a job, and the Greens will campaign for Member States to guarantee such training for all of Europe's citizens.
22. A European passport for third country nationals legally residing in the EU

Third country nationals residing legally within the EU should be given the opportunity to identify themselves directly with Europe as they can not ­ or do not ­ wish, depending upon circumstances, to embrace the nationality of their host Member State. A European passport is a simple and concrete symbol of their being part of Europe. It would make these people personal partners of the European project, and we will work towards its introduction.
23. Annual award for 'best sustainable urban development initiatives'

The majority of the EU's population lives in urban environments. To recognise efforts to improve the quality of life in Europe's cities the Greens will propose the creation of an award for the 'best sustainable urban development initiatives'. Possible criteria for this award would be a considerable modal shift of mobility in favour of walking, cycling and public/collective mobility. This will contribute to safer streets (see European mobility week at the end of September 2004 ­ 'safe streets for children'), better quality of space use and quality of life, better health conditions and less air and noise pollution in cities.
24. Remaking the global trading system

EU trade policy needs to be fundamentally democratised. The first step is an inter-institutional agreement guaranteeing European Parliamentary cooperation concerning trade-negotiating mandates, full information during the negotiating process and co-decision and control over the outcome. The 133 committee ­ the Council working group that decides EU trade policy ­ needs to be opened up to systematic and full parliamentary scrutiny. Trade policy should be subject to environmental policy. Public policy issues must be protected from attack by commercial trade agreements. 7


The WTO must be submitted to the UN system and should deal only with genuine trade concerns. The dispute settlement mechanism has to be removed from it. The WTO has to be set back and eventually subordinated to multilateral environmental agreements and human rights pacts including related organisations such as International Labour Organisation. The UN Development Programme (UNDP) should set the criteria for trade decisions.
25. Reform the international financial institutions

The international financial institutions ­ the World Bank, International Monetary Fund (IMF), European Bank of Reconstruction and Development and the European Investment Bank (EIB) ­ need to be fundamentally reformed. In almost 60 years of their existence the World Bank and the IMF have miserably failed in the fight against poverty. Their statutes and internal rules need a thorough revision in order to: · Allow the democratic participation of all countries involved with fair voting rights · Make eligibility for credits dependent upon criteria formulated by the UNDP, and include human rights and environmental criteria We want all public lending organisations to commit themselves to the sustainability principle and to engage in a continuous dialogue with the public, including NGOs and relevant parliaments. We will also continue our efforts to make the EIB ­ as the financing arm of the Union ­ more transparent and accountable to the European Parliament. Compliance with the overall aims of the Union in all financing activities should be regularly monitored by the Parliament.
26. Protect public services inside and outside the EU

The ongoing GATS (General Agreement on Trade and Services) negotiations are a threat to public services in the South as well as the North. Water, education and health are not commercial goods and consequently should not be subjected to market rules. They should instead be available according to criteria such as necessity and the right of everyone to live well and with dignity. Cities that declare themselves free from GATS thereby express that they do not feel concerned by the ongoing negotiations within the WTO.
27. Reinforced development cooperation

The Greens support the increase of Official Development Aid (ODA) to 0.7% of Gross Domestic Product by 2010. The EU promised in Monterrey in 2002 to increase its development aid to 0.39 percent by 2006. We demand that efforts are increased so we can meet the UN development goals fixed in the 1970s. The Greens also recognise the right of a country or a region to define its development strategy. The EU must put an end to export subsidies, which damage the development of poorer countries. We advocate debt relief and call for a halt to the extraction of unjust debt that is pushing millions of people into destitution, hunger and starvation.
28. Introduce a Tobin tax on financial transactions

The Greens will continue to work for a stronger control of international financial markets. Only a reform of the international financial architecture can avoid disastrous volatility of exchange rates and speculation, which have, on several occasions, nearly destroyed entire national economies (the Asian crisis in the mid 1990s, for example). The introduction of a Tobin tax would help to discourage short-term speculation and enhance stability. A minimal rate of less than a quarter of a 8


percent on all international currency transactions would render unattractive much speculation and provide for a steady income to finance, amongst other things, development projects. In the medium-term, international agreements on capital controls can enhance control over international financial markets.
29. A European social capital fund for sustainable development projects

We have to find new ways of creating employment. The Greens call for the creation of an 'European social capital fund' to promote local and regional investment in sustainable development projects. Similar to the concept of ethical investments, we will encourage people to invest in their region, especially in disadvantaged rural regions where depopulation and unemployment are highest. The stock exchange fund would offer attractive investment opportunities for renewable energies, conservation measures, quality food, agrotourism, sustainable information and training technologies, focussing on building the social capital for economic and social stabilisation of these regions. The fund would also be used to create a critical mass for co-financing of projects and programmes with specific sustainable development goals.
30. Towards harmonised corporate taxation

To attract investment, countries tend to offer special tax privileges to big companies in order to encourage them to move to their territory. In the single market, transnational companies can easily play countries against each other to gain the most favourable tax conditions without losing any market-access rights or advantages they enjoy due to the existence of an internal market. Tax losses occurring from such practices will force countries to increase other taxes, namely taxes on labour, to ensure appropriate state income. For years the Greens have endeavoured to convince the Parliament to call for a minimum level of company taxation to prevent an ever-increasing tax burden on labour. We will campaign to extend co-decision rights on taxation issues to the European Parliament.
31. Promote free software in public administrations

The Greens want to promote free software. Last year, the Green/EFA Group wrote to the European Parliament asking it to switch to free software. At the Rome congress we launched a draft legal text asking for public administrations to switch to free software ­ as they have done in Munich with the 'Linux fur Munchen' initiative. Another success in this area was 'Bundestux' ­ a campaign for the Bundestag to switch to free software, the result of which was that servers and other applications were migrated to free software. The Greens played key roles in these achievements. In the next Parliament, we will work for the adoption of a directive on these topics. Free software gives numerous advantages for public bodies: continuity of data, job creation, transparency, security, and better and cheaper software.
32. Culture is transversal ­ save cultural diversity

Culture must be taken into account in all policies of the Union. Culture must be defined and there must be a breakthrough of traditional and national logic even though there needs not be any harmonisation of regional and national policies. The social and economic dimension of Culture are not sufficiently highlighted and European culture must be more than just taking into account these side effects. Cultural diversity is not protectionism. Therefore the Greens support safeguarding cultural diversity through a legally binding instrument within the UNESCO.

9


33. 500,000 Erasmus students in Europe every year

Around 120,000 students currently benefit from Erasmus grants to study abroad. The Commission aims to triple that number so that three million students will have taken part in the programme by 2010. This is one of the key education programmes and particularly enhances the spirit of European citizenship and cultural sharing. Therefore, the Greens will work towards achieving a five-fold increase in the current annual number of Erasmus students to make it possible for more young people to take part in the programme. We will also demand that it is accessible to all students.
34. European educational program on migration in primary schools

The Greens support the introduction of a European educational program on migration in primary schools. Such a programme would improve the integration of migrants as well as tolerance to cultural diversity. It would form an essential cornerstone in the fight against racism and xenophobia from an early age.
35. Stimulate the European film industry

The market share of European films in the EU fell to 22.5% in 2000 (In the mid-1960s, Europe's share was three times higher) whereas 73.7% of the market was taken by productions from the United States. Better promotion and funding of European films is needed. The Greens propose to enhance a better circulation of European non-national movies in the European market, and also to improve the number of European films seen in third countries and vice-versa. The Greens will also continue to make sure that even though reforms are necessary, the system of national film funding is not endangered by the Union's competition policy.
36. Enhance artists' rights ­ create a European cultural observatory

The freedom and liberty of a society can be measured by how well a society cares about its artists. The EU must play a role in the guarantee of artist's independence and their participation in the value chain for example by ensuring that there are no more buy-out contracts. The EU should finance 'Artists in residence', as are currently run by Member States, for cultural sharing and the promotion of performing arts. The Union has the responsibility to fund European networks and to ensure that funds are allocated in a fair and transparent way. Priority must be given to a European cultural vision and cultural exchanges. The Greens therefore support the creation of a European cultural observatory. This organisation would, among other things, create and maintain an information portal for artists which would be used to provide information about the different and complex cultural structures of Member States, the labour and tax laws for artists. It would also improve cooperation with third countries.
37. An observatory to promote media pluralism and freedom

Media is an essential pillar for the construction of a European society. Media independence and pluralism should therefore be one of the main priorities of the Union. The EU must address the problem posed by threats to media pluralism such as ongoing media concentration and the emergence of media monopolies. EU competition policy must be able to take into account that a media organisation with a dominant market position in one Member State is a threat for media pluralism in the whole Union. One of the conclusions of the 'Media and democracy' conference organised by the Greens was that the creation of an independent media advisory council or a European media observatory would better ensure that pluralism and independence of the media is respected. The Greens will also defend the creation and existence of minority, free and noncommercial media which, in particular, would guarantee access to information. 10


38. A European sports fund for a real European sport policy

There is a need for a real sport policy at the European level, not only for regulating transfers within football teams for instance, but also for a fund with a social, environmental and educational aim. The Greens strongly support the inclusion of sport into the Constitution.
39. Reinforcement of conflict prevention and the European civil peace corps

The EU has developed a European security and defence policy over the past decades based on military and civilian resources. Unfortunately, the military part has been far better developed and financed than the civilian part. It is necessary to rebalance defence expenditures, enhancing conflict prevention and the civilian aspect of defence policy. The European civil peace corps ­ a Green idea ­ is a fundamental step in the right direction and the Greens will work towards its establishment in the next legislature.
40. A binding code of conduct for arms sales of any kind by 2009

The EU has established a code of conduct on the exportation of arms to make sure that weapons do not contribute to human rights' violations, to the de-stabilisation of countries and regions or to the outbreak and/or continuation of violent conflict. That code should become binding legislation for all EU Member states and the European Parliament should have the possibility of controlling its implementation
41. A unique seat for Europe in the UN Security Council

After the adoption of the European constitution the EU is bound to strengthen and enhance its common foreign policy. We support a process leading to France and the UK creating a permanent seat for the EU at the UN Security Council before 2007. The Green will press the EU to convene an international convention on reform of the UN, including representatives from Governments, Parliaments and Civil Society, to improve the efficiency of international institutions.
42. A fully operational International Criminal Court before 2006

The International Criminal Court began its work recently but many important states have not yet signed up to its statute. The biggest problems comes from the US which has launched an international campaign to boycott the Court and is additionally putting a lot of pressure on European and other nations to reject the ICC. The Greens will campaign for the EU to stand up to this pressure.
43. Ban the death penalty worldwide before 2010

Despite enormous international pressure the UN has not been able to establish a global ban ­ or even a moratorium ­ on the death penalty. This means that every year thousands of people are executed ­ quite often on dubious motives or without a fair trial. The European Union should invoke its human rights clauses against partner countries that continue this policy.
44. Make the EU Institutions more transparent, accountable and Green

In five years time Council deliberations on all legislation and legally binding decisions should be public. The Commission's internal documents relating to the preparation of legislation should be made available to citizens and documents relating to violations of EU law should no longer be withheld from citizens in order to protect Member States. All EU institutions should commit to the 'eco-management and audit scheme' and have such systems in place by the end of the next legislature, and when institutions tender they should take environmental and social concerns into account. The EU budget should be subject to eco-social 11


auditing especially in those areas that have a huge impact on the budget, such as agriculture and structural funds. The best way to fight corruption, fraud and mismanagement is to secure more transparency and permit better citizens' control.

Document coordinated by Vula Tsetsi, Co-Secretary General of the Greens/EFA Group
12


