PES · PSE · SPE European Parliament rue Wiertz B 1047 Brussels

GROWING STRONGER TOGETHER Five commitments for the next five years
Manifesto of the Party of European Socialists for the June 2004 European Parliament elections Adopted by the PES Congress, Brussels, 24 April 2004 The European elections in June will be historic. For the first time, people from 10 new Member States will take part in European elections across 25 countries. Members of the new European Parliament will serve the interests of 450 million citizens and will ensure that the EU answers to their needs and priorities. The Party of European Socialists urges voters to seize the opportunity of the elections to shape the European Union's future. Problems and challenges common to all European countries, such as the environment, border control and cross border crime and terrorism, are best tackled by European solutions. Decisions on European law and spending made by MEPs in Brussels and Strasbourg might seem far from home, but they directly affect the working and living conditions of each and every one of us. A vote for Social Democrat candidates is a vote for a European Union that combines social justice within countries and solidarity between countries. It is a vote for a strong, social EU that provides economic success and security for its people: a Union that is able to tackle the major challenges of unemployment, social justice, international terrorism and the global environment. Social democrats of every country are strongly in favour of a successful and united European Union that is an area of peace and cooperation based on partnership and the rule of law. We also recognise that in many policy areas national or local authorities are in a better position to act. The Party of European Socialists offers a programme for a progressive European Union that puts first the concerns of people. We pledge ourselves to work throughout the Europe Union to ensure that all citizens, in both the existing and the new Member States, benefit from EU enlargement. We give voters five key commitments for the European Parliament's next five-year term: · Boost Europe's growth, fight poverty and create more and better jobs · Bring the European Union closer to its citizens · Manage migration and pursue social integration · Build a more secure, sustainable, peaceful and just world · Promote Europe as an area of democracy and equality

PARTY OF EUROPEAN SOCIALISTS · Tel +32 2 284 29 76 · Fax +32 2 230 17 66 · pes@pes.org · www.pes.org


1. Boost Europe's growth, fight poverty and create more and better jobs
Social democrats drew up the first EU action plan for economic and social reform, adopted in its Lisbon Strategy four years ago as developed in Gothenburg, to make the EU the most dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world, capable of sustained economic growth with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion by 2010. Now we want to give fresh impetus to this strategy. Our work programme, Momentum for recovery in Europe promoting public and private investments, proposes a detailed strategy to create more new high-quality jobs by promoting greater investment in research and technology, supporting new growth sectors and reinforcing modern education, training and lifelong learning. We reject the attempts of right-wing governments to limit the Lisbon process to economic reforms by neglecting its social objectives. We demand action to meet the social and employment objectives of the Lisbon strategy, with particular emphasis on reaching the 70 per cent overall employment rate and the 60 per cent rate for women's participation in the workforce by 2010. Higher participation rates will also help us tackle demographic challenges arising from an ageing population. For European Socialists, it is essential that the EU and Member States give more priority to social standards, in particular, the objectives of more and better jobs, full employment, social inclusion, as well as environmental protection and sustainable development. We must preserve, strengthen and modernise the European Social Model which combines economic growth and adequate levels of social protection. To ensure prosperity is shared, we must strengthen social partnership. The convergence of financial performance must be matched by convergence of social standards to ensure that social dumping does not undermine fair competition. Our vision of the European Union is a community based on the principles of the social market economy and mutual cooperation for the benefit of all. We have already fought for and secured European laws to promote greater equality between women and men at work. However, there remain inequalities in income and opportunity. Progress is still needed to ensure that equality laws are respected in practice and that there is sufficient support for working parents. The historic EU enlargement of May 2004, welcoming ten new countries will provide a better standard and quality of life for citizens in the new Member States and stimulate trade and increase jobs across the whole of the EU. We are committed to working towards a more efficient and effective use of the EU budget. Finances should be raised in a fair way between EU countries and citizens on the principle of solidarity between richer and poorer regions. European funds must be sufficient to support the EU's objectives, in particular to ensure enlargement is successful. We are in favour of reforming the stability and growth pact to promote higher growth and employment. Stability should be pursued as a vital condition for growth, not as an alternative to growth. We demand the reform of the European agricultural policy to support rural development in place of the direct subsidy of agricultural produces. It is crucial that

PARTY OF EUROPEAN SOCIALISTS · Tel +32 2 284 29 76 · Fax +32 2 230 17 66 · pes@pes.org · www.pes.org


the reformed agricultural policy promotes high quality and affordable food and respects the environment, landscape and animal welfare. We aim to: · Target EU funds on job creation. · Strengthen the European Social Model and defend trade union rights. · Develop a European monetary policy that promotes growth, sustainable development and employment in a social market economy. · Ensure affordable, accessible and high-quality public services. · Increase the participation rate of women and remove barriers that prevent women from taking up jobs. · Introduce measures to help women and men achieve a better balance between working life and family commitments.

2. Bring the European Union closer to its citizens
The European Union must ensure not only that citizens benefit from its actions but also that they are involved in its decisions. At the same time, in line with the subsidiarity principle, the EU should not act when national or regional bodies are better placed to do so. During the negotiations of the Convention on the Future of Europe, European Socialists played a key role in shaping the draft Constitution and ensured that it included key values and rights. When finalised and ratified, the European Constitution must make the EU institutions more transparent, accountable and relevant to citizens. It must enable their decisions to be more democratic and efficient. It must also help the European Union to speak with a clear and strong voice on the world stage. A Constitution is crucial to the success of an enlarged EU. Its adoption should, therefore, be a priority for European governments. In a European Union for citizens, we propose policies to improve people's quality of life, focusing on equal rights for women and men, rights of employees and consumers, freedom of movement, safety of food, quality of the environment and access to transport. Fighting cross border crime requires a common approach at European level. For this reason, we will work for greater European cooperation to make society free and safe for everyone. The new threat of international terrorism has proved its brutal cruelty on European soil. It threatens the fundamental European values of democracy, human rights and the rule of law. We, as Europeans, must unite against any intimidation of this sort. No country is immune and therefore we need a truly effective co-operation between European police and security agencies to tackle and reduce this threat. European Union policies must provide for future generations by taking on board the priorities of young Europeans in education, information technology, environment and cultural diversity. We must build upon the success of the EU's youth and education programmes. In particular, we support the Bologna process and its overall objective of establishing a European Higher Education Area by 2010. We give priority to improving the conditions for young people in employment, social integration, social protection and other policy areas.

PARTY OF EUROPEAN SOCIALISTS · Tel +32 2 284 29 76 · Fax +32 2 230 17 66 · pes@pes.org · www.pes.org


We aim to: · Adopt a European Constitution that brings the EU closer to its citizens. · Give the highest priority to the fight against terrorism by ensuring effective coordination of the judiciary, police and intelligence agencies. · Improve access to information technology and aim to provide broadband internet access for all citizens by 2012. · Strengthen accountable European police cooperation through Europol to step up the fight against cross-border crime, drug trafficking and money laundering.

3. Manage migration and pursue social integration
We want active, firm and just management of migration and integration. We recognise the positive contribution of legal migrants and support a multicultural and tolerant society. At the same time, we must tackle illegal immigration and crack down on human trafficking and exploitation. We vehemently oppose racism and xenophobia wherever it is found. We oppose attempts by right wing forces to exploit the issue of immigration to create divisions in our society and to undermine the diversity and stability of Europe. We reject any cooperation with extreme right-wing movements and parties. To complement national measures, we will seek an EU-wide approach to migration with two key features. First, we will pursue an active policy of social inclusion and integration. Member States, in partnership with local authorities, must ensure that migrants can exercise all their civic and social rights, and that there is a shared management of migration flows. Second, in partnership with progressive forces in other countries, we will promote a global development policy that promotes a better life in the countries of origin of migration. Fostering economic and social development in those countries and improving their humanitarian conditions must be central to European migration policy. The European Union must continue to be a place of refuge for victims of persecution. It must offer full protection to asylum seekers, while co-operating to halt false claims to asylum by economic migrants. We aim to: · Develop a European immigration and asylum policy with common standards on visa rules and asylum status. · Use the European Social Fund to set up integration policies that include better education for migrants and community involvement. · Fight racism and xenophobia across the EU. · Improve the standard of living in countries of origin of migration through international organisations and cooperation agreements.

PARTY OF EUROPEAN SOCIALISTS · Tel +32 2 284 29 76 · Fax +32 2 230 17 66 · pes@pes.org · www.pes.org


4. Build a more secure, sustainable, peaceful and just world
We want a strong European Union that has a clear voice in international forums, pressing for a just, stable and peaceful world in accordance with international law and in the framework of the United Nations. We need reform of the United Nations to enhance its role in ensuring global peace and common security and to make it more representative. The European Union must pay a leading role in working for effective multilateralism, enabling countries to work better together to resolve conflicts and to respond to new security threats. The fight against international terrorism will succeed only if we tackle the causes of terrorism. We should further develop the European Security and Defence Policy to become a credible instrument in terms of conflict prevention and crisis management. We support the European Security Strategy adopted by the Council in 2003 which will provide the framework for a more effective Common Foreign and Security Policy. We are committed to strengthening stability in South East Europe and to encouraging the European orientation of the countries of the former Yugoslavia. We must develop our partnerships with our neighbours in the Northern Dimension and revitalise the Barcelona process for our partners from the Mediterranean basin. Our values of human rights and democracy must not stop at our borders but need to be promoted in the countries beyond our new eastern borders. In cooperation with other progressive forces in the world, we have proposed new policies to meet global challenges, in particular the United Nations Millennium Development Goals. These policies include trade with fair access to our markets for developing countries, particularly for agricultural products, aid for social development especially health and education, higher social standards and greater emphasis on sustainable development. We will step up efforts to fight global poverty and cancel the debt of developing countries. We will also intensify the global fight against AIDS and other diseases related to poverty by promoting access to affordable methods of prevention and drugs for treatment. To achieve these objectives, we must ensure that they are fully shared by international organisations, such as the World Trade Organisation, the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. We will push for a progressive globalisation, which not only increases trade with developing countries, but also promotes democracy, human rights and environmental protection in these countries. The EU must play its part in ensuring good corporate governance and social responsibility of business wherever it trades. We must deliver the commitments made in Kyoto to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and then to develop more ambitious targets for climate stability. To promote global sustainability, we will encourage substituting more sustainable alternatives to the excessive use of natural resources, especially fossil fuels. We aim to: · Strengthen the UN and its institutions and improve cooperation. · Enhance European Security and Defence Policy in its role in conflict prevention and crisis management. · Use EU influence to resume and complete world trade talks to promote global
PARTY OF EUROPEAN SOCIALISTS · Tel +32 2 284 29 76 · Fax +32 2 230 17 66 · pes@pes.org · www.pes.org


· · ·

fair trade. End quotas and tariffs on exports from developing countries and reform the Common Agricultural Policy. Ensure that our development policies respect the priority of protecting and sustaining the environment. Build on existing efforts in the area of environment and social responsibility of global business.

5. Promote Europe as an area of democracy and equality
Our vision is of a European Union based on democracy, equality, respect for human rights, diversity and the rule of law. For this reason, we support the Charter of Fundamental Rights and its inclusion in the Constitution. We should also promote these values beyond the borders of the EU. We support a strengthened role for the European Parliament as the directly elected voice of the European people. For social democrats, equality is one of our most important values: democracy is not possible without equality. We oppose all forms of discrimination, including any based on race, religion, belief, gender, disability, age or sexual orientation. Fraud and corruption undermine democracy and we will root them out wherever they are found. We oppose media concentration and monopoly control of economic and political power. We will continue to press for further reform of the EU's institutions. We will fight for openness and transparency, with sound financial management, open competition and value for money in the European Commission. We aim to: · Strengthen the role of the European Parliament as the democratic voice of the European people. · Promote equality and fight all forms of discrimination. · Reinforce alliances against extreme right-wing forces and challenge other parties, in particular those belonging to the right-wing European People's Party, to sign the EU Charter for a Non-Racist Society, already signed by all European Social Democrat parties. · Increase the size and effectiveness of the European Anti-Fraud Office to ensure that it acts earlier on cases of concern.

Your vote counts
The Party of European Socialists urges all voters to take part in the elections of June 2004 and to vote for our vision of the future. Europe is growing. Together we can make it stronger and better. Europe needs your vote.

PARTY OF EUROPEAN SOCIALISTS · Tel +32 2 284 29 76 · Fax +32 2 230 17 66 · pes@pes.org · www.pes.org


The Party of European Socialists is made up of 28 Socialist, Social Democratic and Labour Parties from the 25 Member States and Norway, as well as 13 associate and observer parties. Its partner organisations include ECOSY (Young European Socialists) and PES Women. It seeks common strategies and coordinates policy positions. The manifesto provides an overview of our guiding principles and policies. In addition we have a wealth of detailed policy documents: -Europe and a New Global Order - bridging the global divides -Europe 2004 - Changing the future (Political declaration of the PES High Level Policy Group on Globalisation) tabled by Poul Nyrup Rasmussen, former Prime Minister of Denmark May 2003 Europe's new neighbours - A post-enlargement strategy for European foreign policy tabled by PES Vice-Chairs Rudolf Scharping and Jan Marinus Wiersma March 2004 Approving the new constitution: democracy and transparency tabled by PES Vice Chair Giuliano Amato April 2004

-Promoting investment, sustainable growth and full employment -Momentum for recovery in Europe promoting public and private investments tabled by Poul Nyrup Rasmussen, former Prime Minister of Denmark 2003/2004 The Roma people: discrimination and exclusion tabled by PES Vice Chair Jan Marinus Wiersma Managing migration and integration tabled by Anna Terrón i Cusí MEP Nov. 2003 March 2004

The Reform of the Common Agricultural Policy and Food Safety tabled by PES Vice Chair Henri Nallet, Willi Gorlach MEP and Frans Timmermans MP November 2002 PES Working Group Paper on Sustainable Development tabled by Göran Persson, Swedish Prime Minister Transatlantic dialogue: building global alliances for the 21st century tabled by SI President Antonio Guterres and PES President Robin Cook March 2002 March 2004

European Party Statute: strengthening the Party of European Socialists tabled by PES Treasurer Ruairi Quinn and Secretary General Antony Beumer April 2004 These reports, along with national manifestos of PES parties, are available on the PES website -- www.pes.org. Additional documents are available on the website of the PES Parliamentary Group: www.socialistgroup.org

PARTY OF EUROPEAN SOCIALISTS · Tel +32 2 284 29 76 · Fax +32 2 230 17 66 · pes@pes.org · www.pes.org


